Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So as you see, the lecture recording has started.
NOTE CONF
I just want to make you aware that that clock
there is three minutes fast.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going by that one.
Anyhow, I just want to make you aware before I
NOTE CONF
start.
I've been asked by my peers to display this here.
NOTE CONF
It's a group of second and third year students who
are sort of wanting to pair up with first year.
NOTE CONF
Um, and discussing Ila helping them with Ila.
These are students who've been in your shoes, uh, last
NOTE CONF
year or the year before.
And it can be quite useful.
NOTE CONF
Um, especially if you sort of think you could do
with more help.
NOTE CONF
I will include that slide in the set that I'll
upload on the webpage.
NOTE CONF
Um, later this afternoon if you haven't had a chance.
Um, also, those are the attendance poll for this week.
NOTE CONF
Uh, Thursday we do the attendance poll.
Um, if you're missing this.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've got the coat there because I'm going to
change that Start now to display my lecture poles, which
NOTE CONF
is a different code.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So after that, um, linear algebra again week three.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the topic we're doing today is actually two
relatively different topics that we're doing today that we're doing
NOTE CONF
this week first elementary matrices today and then linear transformations
tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
The elementary matrices um, to some extent bridges the gap
between week one where we did Gaussian elimination row operations,
NOTE CONF
um, and week two where we did matrix algebra.
Um, and we're going to see that you have seen
NOTE CONF
from reading that this is pretty much two sides of
the same coin.
NOTE CONF
Um, they're really the same thing.
We're trying to bridge the gap and seeing the connection
NOTE CONF
there.
Um, but before we get there, um, not this one,
NOTE CONF
just to sort of have a warm up, um, this
sort of hangs on from last week.
NOTE CONF
Um, one poll, um, that I didn't manage to do
that, but we will see that something like that we're
NOTE CONF
going to need later at least an extension.
So I'd like you at the moment.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I just need to quickly go stop this
here.
NOTE CONF
Oh, no.
I actually can keep this up.
NOTE CONF
I just see I've done this cleverer than I thought
and go.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've got four choices.
Reset.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I think I can display that one minute.
Indeed.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Almost time up.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Halfway between.
NOTE CONF
Halfway between A and B.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, good that I do that.
Um, I'm just going to.
NOTE CONF
Well, then giving this back to you, I'm just going
to do this, um, on here.
NOTE CONF
So I'm asking you once this comes up in a
second.
NOTE CONF
What is a B transpose?
Um, and the transpose of that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a couple of rules now that we
have to play with.
NOTE CONF
At the same time, the first thing to notice is
that this sort of transpose on the B, it's only
NOTE CONF
only applies to the B nor to the A.
So this is really sort of write it as a
NOTE CONF
times B transposed and the whole thing transposed.
Um, now if I transpose the product of two matrices,
NOTE CONF
I actually need to change the order of the matrices.
And I think that's the bit that the people who
NOTE CONF
thought, um, that answer A was right had forgotten.
So I need to change the order of the matrices.
NOTE CONF
So I have to say this is B transposed And
the transpose of that times the first matrix A here
NOTE CONF
and again the transpose of that.
And then I can of course use that.
NOTE CONF
I know B transpose.
Transpose is just the matrix B, so this is B
NOTE CONF
a transpose.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
But do remember that we need to change the order.
That's the important bit.
NOTE CONF
And that's the reason actually why I'm doing this and
why I'm reminding you because we're seeing that later.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that was answer B.
Um, a related thing now in terms of using several
NOTE CONF
rules is what would you do if I ask if
I had three matches this year?
NOTE CONF
And I ask you to say, what is A times
B times C and the whole thing transposed?
NOTE CONF
Um, anybody's got any suspicions?
What did you see?
NOTE CONF
Transpose.
Times B.
NOTE CONF
28.
That's the sort of obvious thing you'd assume.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, you change the order, so it must hold for
any amount of matrices.
NOTE CONF
How would you prove that, though?
I guess you would do A, B, c transpose.
NOTE CONF
So do you like that?
Like I said.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah I know that's correct.
NOTE CONF
And you could do it either way.
You can break it down.
NOTE CONF
You're perfectly right.
I could write this as a and then b c
NOTE CONF
and transpose it.
And then now b c is sort of one matrix
NOTE CONF
which don't need to give a name.
It's just a matrix.
NOTE CONF
But we're just a product of two matrices.
So we can do this as b c transpose times
NOTE CONF
A transpose.
And now we we leave the A transpose there where
NOTE CONF
we can now do with a, b, c transpose.
Again flipping the order there so it is C transposed
NOTE CONF
B transposed A transposed.
Um, now question is what is it with four matrices
NOTE CONF
or 5 or 6 and so on.
And the suspicion, of course.
NOTE CONF
It'll just carry on.
But you would have to prove it.
NOTE CONF
And you can't really prove it for any possible number
of n.
NOTE CONF
So there's something called um, um, there's something called induction
that you can use.
NOTE CONF
So proof and problem solving, you might have seen this
in school or proofs and problem solving in semester two
NOTE CONF
will go further into that.
But I just want you to remind you of that
NOTE CONF
and also tell you the same rules apply.
If we had inverses instead of transposes.
NOTE CONF
Um, and uh, as I say, we're going to need
that um, later.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what do I want to do after that.
So ba transpose was correct.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So let's get on to what we're doing today.
NOTE CONF
Elementary matrices.
Um, so the definition that Nicholson gave was the following.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'll just go with that.
An elementary matrices is a square matrix.
NOTE CONF
that can be obtained from the identity by a single
elementary row operation.
NOTE CONF
A note that is given this definition at the moment,
not that, comes later.
NOTE CONF
It's the matrix that is equivalent to a row operation.
But it's just saying, uh, if we can obtain it
NOTE CONF
by a single elementary row operation from the identity, then
it's an elementary matrix.
NOTE CONF
Well, and we just to remind you, we had sort
of three types of row operations.
NOTE CONF
Type one is just swapping two rows.
Um, type three.
NOTE CONF
Type two is multiplying a row with a multiple with
a with a scalar.
NOTE CONF
And type three is adding a multiple of one row
to another row, um, or rather replacing one row by
NOTE CONF
that row plus the multiple of another one.
Um, actually, in this case, the replacing operation is just
NOTE CONF
as important as combining them.
So you have to You have to replace the correct
NOTE CONF
role for this to work.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, next poll now that we have the definition
question is which of these matrices that I've got here,
NOTE CONF
um, are elementary matrices.
That's not elementary row operations, elementary matrices.
NOTE CONF
So again, uh, give me a second and I'll display
the poll again.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Oh sorry sorry sorry sorry sorry.
NOTE CONF
Back, back I did that.
Um, there's more than one.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is more than one.
And I need to give you a poll that allows
NOTE CONF
you to give me more than one answer.
So there we go.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Second try.
Okay, a few more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You say A and C, um, and I believe indeed
NOTE CONF
those are the correct answers.
A few people say also B so um, D is
NOTE CONF
out.
Um, because I said it had to be a square
NOTE CONF
matrix.
D is obviously not square.
NOTE CONF
Um, um, although sort of you, it's just swapping two
rows from.
NOTE CONF
But you do need a square matrix.
Um, so the other is um, matrix A yes.
NOTE CONF
I'm multiplying, um, the third row by two matrix C
yes.
NOTE CONF
Um, adding five times the first row to the second.
Um, matrix B um, if you look closely, you realise
NOTE CONF
there's actually two row operations that are in here, one
after the other.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, um, it's both swapping rows one and two.
Um, and also more deploying the third row by two.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it's a combination.
It's not an elementary matrix.
NOTE CONF
The elementary matrix is really just obtained by one row
operation from the identity.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So that now leads us.
NOTE CONF
Um, so A and C were the correct ones there.
Um, that leads us to the sort of, um, relation
NOTE CONF
this house with Gaussian elimination.
And Nicholson has this lemma here.
NOTE CONF
Um, if an elementary row operation put this on both
here.
NOTE CONF
Um, if an elementary row operation is performed on a
m times n matrix, the matrix we are performing that
NOTE CONF
on doesn't have to be square.
Um, the result is the matrix E, where E is
NOTE CONF
the M times M square.
No elementary matrix corresponding to that operation.
NOTE CONF
Um, now, I don't know how you like.
When I first read that, I had to read that
NOTE CONF
about three times to understand what Nicholson actually meant by
that.
NOTE CONF
So let me paraphrase that a bit.
So what is it saying is the following.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I've got a matrix A here, and I'm
performing an elementary row operation on that matrix to get,
NOTE CONF
um, the matrix, a dash here.
Um, and then I say that this elementary row operation,
NOTE CONF
um, corresponds to the matrix E.
Well, then I have that.
NOTE CONF
I could also get a dash here by taking E
times a, um, or even a little bit more explicit.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I say if I have an elementary
row operation, um, and I'm going to call this R
NOTE CONF
here now performed on a matrix so that by this
row operation, I'm transferring the matrix A into the matrix
NOTE CONF
E dash.
Um, this thing that the matrix E here should correspond
NOTE CONF
to that row operation means by what we had earlier
that if I apply the same row operation to the
NOTE CONF
identity matrix here, then I'm going to get the matrix
E that's the elementary matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um, then I also have that a dash here equals
to E times a.
NOTE CONF
So we've now got a link here um, between, on
the one hand, the row operations that we've done in
NOTE CONF
week one and the matrix algebra that we've done in
week two, that they're really just two sides of the
NOTE CONF
same coin.
And that's very, very useful.
NOTE CONF
Know it a might be useful if you want to
do something like implement Gaussian elimination on a computer.
NOTE CONF
Um, although you wouldn't actually do that by um, by
multiplying matrices together.
NOTE CONF
Um, but um, also this becomes quite important for theoretical
trying to prove some theory or understanding really what Gauss
NOTE CONF
elimination does.
And also the character of matrices.
NOTE CONF
We'll do a little bit of that today.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I think at that point I was just to complete
NOTE CONF
the whole thing.
I was just going to go back to my example
NOTE CONF
here.
Um, and just to, um, sort of just in case,
NOTE CONF
um, say, well, we've now let's check that this works
here.
NOTE CONF
We've got this matrix C here, um, 1511.
And we certainly obtaining that from the identity matrix by
NOTE CONF
adding five times the first row to the second row.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now let's see whether that works.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've got this matrix C here um, which
is 111000.
NOTE CONF
Um and we've got a five there, 500.
Um, and we are moving the applying that from the
NOTE CONF
left by just a general three by three matrix.
So let's call this just a b c d e
NOTE CONF
f g h I.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, let's go on.
NOTE CONF
Um, so first element here a this first column here
times the first row will give us me and a,
NOTE CONF
um indeed I'll have the same thing for the complete
first row here.
NOTE CONF
This times.
This will just give me the B this times.
NOTE CONF
This will give me the C.
Um, now this column here times that row will give
NOTE CONF
me A5A plus one times D plus d this times
that will give me five b plus um e times
NOTE CONF
one times e.
and then I'm going to go to five C plus
NOTE CONF
um f and then finally, um this column here times
that row is going to give me the G.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the same for the other two.
I'm just going to get H and I back.
NOTE CONF
Um, and indeed uh, it's a bit off there.
Um, indeed.
NOTE CONF
We see what we've done here is just adding five
times the first row to the second row and replacing
NOTE CONF
the second row by that.
Now.
NOTE CONF
So this was um, r two is replaced by five.
Um, by sorry by R two plus five times R1.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, let's do a little bit more on that.
Um, so I've got a few more matrices here that
NOTE CONF
I just learned, a few row operations that these could
be, um, and I'm just asking you to match them.
NOTE CONF
So, um, we've got a matching poll here.
Matching down here.
NOTE CONF
And because it's a little bit complex, I want to
give you two minutes there.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you are right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, just play now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That should work.
Um, so my matching poll here.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Wait.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry.
NOTE CONF
I need to start again.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I should be able to reset this here.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, we just have to do with that.
NOTE CONF
Why can't I not reset this?
Okay, we'll just have to carry on with that.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The police life.
I'm going to give you two minutes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Results are coming in.
NOTE CONF
All right.
First minute.
NOTE CONF
Solo.
All.
NOTE CONF
Right.
All.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're almost.
At the end.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That's it.
NOTE CONF
So most frequent answer.
So people think that see matches to for um it's
NOTE CONF
the most frequent one.
And indeed that sort of swapped rows one and two.
NOTE CONF
And that is C uh people also think that E
matches to one um E matches to one.
NOTE CONF
So.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so how do we get the one there from
NOTE CONF
the identity matrix adding twice the second row onto the
first one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, adding twice the second row onto the first one.
NOTE CONF
Um, correct.
Um, a doesn't match anything.
NOTE CONF
Well, we keep with we leave it, um, with a
a is the one that is left over.
NOTE CONF
Uh, B matches to true.
Um, so B cells multiplying second row by two be
NOTE CONF
matches to two.
Um, slightly surprised that that wasn't the most the second
NOTE CONF
most popular one.
And then finally D matches to three D matches.
NOTE CONF
Do not have that.
Just that they all are changed.
NOTE CONF
Uh, no d d matches to three.
So adding twice the first row to the second row.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
And a is the one that is left over.
NOTE CONF
Um, good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
That's fine.
NOTE CONF
Um, recognising elementary matrices.
Um, we will have another one.
NOTE CONF
So this is all square matrices at the moment.
So what do you think.
NOTE CONF
So there's the matching um, the correct one.
I think that's what we just had.
NOTE CONF
Um, so good.
Um, so, um, what is the case if I'm applying
NOTE CONF
this to a matrix that isn't square?
Um, but I've got.
NOTE CONF
This one here.
And I need a poll with three choices.
NOTE CONF
I've got a timer, not multiple answers.
Oh, I thought they reset, but it's hidden down there.
NOTE CONF
That's where the reset is hidden.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Three choices displayed.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, almost at the end.
Right.
NOTE CONF
B and indeed B is correct.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it's obvious that what we've started swapping rows
one and two, um, and all of these three things
NOTE CONF
have somehow swapped rows one and two.
The question is just what is your starting point.
NOTE CONF
And you're swapping you've got two rows here.
So your starting point has got to be something.
NOTE CONF
And I mentioned two.
And we have to have a square matrix to start
NOTE CONF
with.
Um so B here is the correct starting point in
NOTE CONF
order to swap rows one and two.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I did stress that.
See here that we can't have but we have to
NOTE CONF
have square matrices.
Otherwise I thought at beginning that it seems quite logical
NOTE CONF
that you want something to match the dimension.
But no, you want something a square matrix in the
NOTE CONF
row dimensions.
So last thing on the sort of just playing around
NOTE CONF
with elementary matrices.
Um, so all elementary matrices are actually invertible.
NOTE CONF
Um, which is a nice property because all elementary row
operations we can reverse, we can do the opposite.
NOTE CONF
So let's give you an example here.
So I've got this matrix either similar to what we
NOTE CONF
had earlier.
And I want you to know what is the what
NOTE CONF
you want you to tell me or think about what
is the inverse of that.
NOTE CONF
And I'm hoping you that the inverse actually is by
just replacing that five on the bottom left corner by
NOTE CONF
a different number.
But what should be the number you want to replace
NOTE CONF
it with?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Five choices.
Reset.
NOTE CONF
And play.
No.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it gives you the time, I guess, you know,
NOTE CONF
to, like, um, two minutes.
I only want at one minute.
NOTE CONF
Really?
I stopped this after one minute.
NOTE CONF
Okay, ten more seconds and then I'll go to the
results.
NOTE CONF
So the votes are coming in and you can keep
them coming in, but I'll show you the results.
NOTE CONF
Um, and most people have said B, which indeed turns
out to be the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
But now the question is, I mean, I am n
two to, um, I am n to remember all of
NOTE CONF
these inverses and no, you're not.
I mean, I don't know them.
NOTE CONF
I wouldn't have been able to tell you offhand which
one of those is the inverse.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you should know how to work these out
by first principles or so, and I just want to
NOTE CONF
quickly go through that.
So what we're wanting here is that we say we've
NOTE CONF
got this matrix.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what's our matrix?
One, one, one and a five down here 00000.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we want to find the inverse.
So in other words, we want to find a matrix
NOTE CONF
here, um, such that if we multiply that, we're going
to get the identity.
NOTE CONF
Um, um, so now, of course, I could try playing
around and then saying, okay, this is a matrix A,
NOTE CONF
B, C, D and so on.
Um, and let's sort of make a system of equations,
NOTE CONF
see whether I can work out whether zeros are, um,
what it should be, or I can take the hint
NOTE CONF
and saying only actually I need one element there.
Um, but I can do it in a different way.
NOTE CONF
So I'm pretty more deploying here with something that I
know is going to be an elementary row operation.
NOTE CONF
So an elementary matrix and I want to do is
such that this here becomes the identity.
NOTE CONF
So from what we've done before, all I need to
work out is what row operations do I have to
NOTE CONF
do on this matrix here in order to get the
identity?
NOTE CONF
Well, so how how does that work?
Which row operation is the right one?
NOTE CONF
Becomes all three minus five times a one.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So I can't get that to the identity.
If I replace the third row, um, with the third
NOTE CONF
row minus five times the first row.
Well, so what I need to do is I need
NOTE CONF
to replace the third row, um, by the third row,
minus five times the first row.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if we applying this here, the elementary matrix
corresponding to that is indeed, uh, starting with the identity
NOTE CONF
and then just five times minus five times the first
row added onto that is the minus five here.
NOTE CONF
Um, that should be it.
And you can now go through and just check that
NOTE CONF
this indeed holds here.
So one times one gives me one, one times this
NOTE CONF
one or the ones on different locations.
So it all cancels.
NOTE CONF
This one here I have a one times minus one
plus one times.
NOTE CONF
Sorry one times minus five plus one times five.
Cancel.
NOTE CONF
It gives me the zero.
And you can go through um that this works, but
NOTE CONF
just sort of playing a little bit with what we
know about elementary row operations.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's sort of enough about this sort of algebra
NOTE CONF
and how the whole thing works and how we recognise
them.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's time to have a little bit of what
that tells us about the nature of matrices.
NOTE CONF
Um, what we've done so far.
So the first thing is, um, I was wondering why
NOTE CONF
why are these things called elementary matrices?
So is it like this guy that says, this is
NOTE CONF
really elementary?
There should be really, really easy.
NOTE CONF
And that's why the elementary matrices, it's just it's just
a simple thing.
NOTE CONF
Um, you might think so, but I don't think that
that's what why it's called elementary matrices.
NOTE CONF
Rather, I think what we've got here is something like
that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You can think of elementary matrices as something like Lego
NOTE CONF
blocks.
These are the building blocks of anything else of any
NOTE CONF
other, actually any other invertible matrix.
Um, and we will see that this sort of final
NOTE CONF
result really of that session.
So that's what, um, elementary means in this case.
NOTE CONF
These are the building blocks of other matrices.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
There are, there are this sort of most, most basic,
NOTE CONF
most simple elementary, um, invertible matrices that you can think
of apart from the identity.
NOTE CONF
But really, I think it's the building blocks.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, going into that, um, I've got another poll which
is now getting a little bit more that you need
NOTE CONF
to think about what's going on here.
Um, so suppose we've got the following situation.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've got A and B are matrices such that
I can get from A to B by elementary row
NOTE CONF
operations and saying I need a sequence of row operations,
not just one a sequence of k row operations.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I denote by e1, e2, e, k the
matrices that correspond to these row operations.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that means somehow I must be able to
write the new matrix B as something like u times
NOTE CONF
A is something multiplied from the left times A.
Now it's just not a single matrix.
NOTE CONF
It's a sequence of matrices.
What's the right thing to do here for you?
NOTE CONF
Well.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Not multiple answers.
And the time I display.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, ten more seconds.
See, is what most of you say.
NOTE CONF
And indeed, um, that is the correct answer.
Um, and again, um, we can sort of get there,
NOTE CONF
um, by thinking, um, so what do we have?
Uh, we know that we're going to get our matrix
NOTE CONF
B, um, from the matrix A.
Um, by somehow multiplying from the left.
NOTE CONF
Um, and now what do we do?
Um, we saying, first of all, we going to apply
NOTE CONF
the elementary row operation E1 to it.
So we're going to start with, um, applying E1 to
NOTE CONF
that.
Um, and then so this becomes the new matrix here.
NOTE CONF
And after that we are applying E2 to that, um,
and so on.
NOTE CONF
And then E3, um, and we carry on until finally
we apply e k to the whole thing as the
NOTE CONF
last row operation.
Um, and of course, um, this is now lots of
NOTE CONF
brackets.
We know we can, we can re bracket the whole
NOTE CONF
thing.
We can write this here as EQ times, times E3,
NOTE CONF
times e2 times E1, um, and that whole thing times,
eh?
NOTE CONF
Um, and then, uh, this here.
Um, the combination of all these elementary row operations, we
NOTE CONF
can just call you, um.
And that was the answer.
NOTE CONF
The answer?
See?
NOTE CONF
There.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
How do we get this to you?
NOTE CONF
Um.
And again.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what I've shown you before.
Um, so this here, um, this is really was from
NOTE CONF
a theorem 2.51 and Nicholson.
Um, and the theorem actually did have a third part.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here's the theorem again.
Um, so, so a suppose that A and B are
NOTE CONF
matrices such that you can get from A to B
by row operations.
NOTE CONF
Um, then we know that we can write B as
two times a and we've got um a representation of
NOTE CONF
U.
That's what we've just done.
NOTE CONF
And also Nicholson says the following that indeed we can
compute you by, um, oops, doing this here.
NOTE CONF
Um, what we've known for the, um, or what I
showed you as the algorithm to correct to, to get
NOTE CONF
inverses.
Um, so we can start with an augmented system here
NOTE CONF
that we have the matrix A augmented by the identity,
apply row operations to A, so that we're going to
NOTE CONF
get to be um, at the same time the identity
matrix here would be transformed to you.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I showed you that last time as a
way to, to get the identity as a sort of
NOTE CONF
this is just the magic trick.
Um, why does it work?
NOTE CONF
Um, and we now know or have the, um, half
a bit of an understanding and know why this would
NOTE CONF
work.
Let me just check that.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm not ahead of myself.
Um, so what we're saying is basically the following, um,
NOTE CONF
that we're saying that if I've got my matrix A
here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, and I say I can get by elementary by
NOTE CONF
some row operations.
So I'm going to call these row operations.
NOTE CONF
Are you here?
Um, so if I take this here IU, I'm going
NOTE CONF
to get as the row operation, um, the corresponding to
the matrix.
NOTE CONF
You I'm going to get to matrix U a and
this matrix here is um b this is what I
NOTE CONF
call b.
So I'm going to get from A to B by
NOTE CONF
row operations.
Um I these row operations I call ru and you
NOTE CONF
as the sort of combination of matrices that corresponds to
that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That's the setup there.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I now do and say I'm going to
apply a same row operations here, um, to the matrix,
NOTE CONF
I to the identity.
What I'm getting to is also you times I know
NOTE CONF
and just this gives me the matrix.
You.
NOTE CONF
And that indeed is what this is saying that if
I the same row operations that take A to B,
NOTE CONF
if I apply them to I um, that will give
me the matrix U.
NOTE CONF
Um, and of course you could ask the matrix B
that you wanted to get to.
NOTE CONF
You could choose the identity.
Um, and if you're doing that, um, this will now
NOTE CONF
give you the proof that indeed what you're getting out
of the process, in the position of you there is
NOTE CONF
the inverse of the matrix you started with.
Now, um, think about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, that just said, this is the reason why the
whole thing works.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I think let me just check where I
am at the moment.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I'm totally sure I might.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, let's let me let me just do that.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to do an another example on this.
Did I, um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I did one two.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, let's just have another example on the whole
NOTE CONF
thing.
Uh, keep this up here and say, let's say I've
NOTE CONF
got matrices A is uh, one, two, three, four and
the matrix B is six, 812.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh, so um, have a look at these.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I sort of, um, you should see relatively
quickly that you can't get from A to B by,
NOTE CONF
uh, two actually row operations.
Um, and let's just try this sort of algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So we've got one, two, three, four and we say
we want to apply the same thing here to the
NOTE CONF
identity matrix.
So can anybody tell me a row operation that will
NOTE CONF
get me at least in the right direction?
What should I do?
NOTE CONF
So for a one row run it were two.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's start with that one.
That at least gives us here.
NOTE CONF
So if we're swapping that um, so R1 swap with
R2.
NOTE CONF
Um, that will give us a uh 3412.
We're doing the same thing on the identity.
NOTE CONF
So this will give us A0110.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and the other operation, what else do we need
NOTE CONF
to multiply?
Row one by two.
NOTE CONF
Indeed.
So row one gets replaced by two.
NOTE CONF
Row one.
Uh, so this will now give us six, eight one,
NOTE CONF
two.
On the other hand 0210.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is B uh, we got there.
Um, and, uh, so this here is B, this here
NOTE CONF
is, you know, um, and we can now check that,
um, u times a equals to be, you know, um,
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to do that here at the moment,
but it's the whole process at work.
NOTE CONF
You take those matrices, multiply them out, convince yourself that
this actually does work.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Um, just to warn you, you may very well get
NOTE CONF
something like this exercise that a heart here in a
quiz or in a, uh, synoptic assessment.
NOTE CONF
So it's a, it's a popular, um, it's a popular
thing to ask.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I say this also applies to the identity.
Okay, so we now know how to get from A
NOTE CONF
to B by elementary row operations.
And what this does with a matrix view.
NOTE CONF
The question is can I always go back.
So once I've done that I have a way from
NOTE CONF
A to B with a matrix view.
Do I know that I can always reverse that.
NOTE CONF
So what do you think?
No, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Why does this not work?
Have I've forgotten?
NOTE CONF
Reset.
Display.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It works now.
By 10s.
NOTE CONF
Majority think it's always and indeed it is always.
So and again just just quickly sort of talk you
NOTE CONF
through the argument, um, why this would be the case.
So we have seen that if we go from a,
NOTE CONF
um, to be elementary row operation, um, that means that
we know that we can write B as you times
NOTE CONF
A, we use invertible, you know?
Um.
NOTE CONF
So you as this sort of, uh, combination of elementary
matrices.
NOTE CONF
Um, now, of course, we can now multiply the whole
thing by u minus one to give us that u
NOTE CONF
minus one b equals to a.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Multiplying from the left by u minus one.
Or this tells us that a equals to u minus
NOTE CONF
one b.
So again we have that.
NOTE CONF
Now we can get um we can write A as
an invertible matrix times B that looks okay.
NOTE CONF
The only thing that we have to think about is
we know that this u here um, u here was
NOTE CONF
a um, was a combination of um, a product of
elementary matrices.
NOTE CONF
So this is e k times e2 times E1.
Uh, so what is u minus one.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is what I said earlier.
Um, so u minus one obviously is this whole thing
NOTE CONF
here, um, inverted.
Um, and now we know how to get that.
NOTE CONF
We get that by just changing the order.
So this is E one minus one times E two
NOTE CONF
minus one and so on.
Times e k minus one.
NOTE CONF
Now um each of those here, um, it's the inverse
of an elementary matrix Which we know is also an
NOTE CONF
elementary matrix.
So again, we can write a as a sequence of
NOTE CONF
elementary matrices applied to be.
In other words we can get from B to a
NOTE CONF
m.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So to summarise that if we have something that we
say if it's something like this is symmetric, that we
NOTE CONF
go from A to B and means we can get
from B to A if and only if we call
NOTE CONF
this an equivalent.
And in this case we can say that two matrices
NOTE CONF
A and B are row equivalent.
If we go from A to B by elementary row
NOTE CONF
operations, and that implies we can also get vice versa
equivalences.
NOTE CONF
Again, not necessarily in this case, but equivalence is again
is something that you will see a few times.
NOTE CONF
So to finish the whole thing off, I've got one
last, um, last poll here.
NOTE CONF
Um, which says that, um, I've got an n times
n matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um, and which of these conditions that are half here
is now equivalent or is now equivalent to that?
NOTE CONF
The matrix A is invertible.
That is a bit of what we had last week.
NOTE CONF
Um, and a bit of what I've done just now.
Um, this again will be a poll, um, where I've
NOTE CONF
got multiple choices.
So I'll just set this up.
NOTE CONF
And it would have a choice this time or one
minute display now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Ten more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We're not quite clear.
NOTE CONF
B and D are the most favourite, but you're not
sure, so let's look a, um, um, it's really equivalent
NOTE CONF
to matrix and reduce alone form.
That's not enough.
NOTE CONF
Actually, every matrix is equivalent to a matrix in row
echelon form.
NOTE CONF
If it's an invertible matrix, it'll be actually be.
It's equivalent to the identity.
NOTE CONF
So reduced form is not enough.
Um part C um it is an elementary matrix, while
NOTE CONF
every elementary matrix is invertible, but not every invertible matrix
is elementary.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, rather, um.
NOTE CONF
D is correct.
Um, every elementary matrix is a every invertible matrix is
NOTE CONF
a product of elementary matrices.
Now, um, b I should say is correct as well.
NOTE CONF
Um B follows from what we have from the inverse
theorem we had in the last lecture.
NOTE CONF
Uh, for every right hand side there is a solution.
And also we have been shown that this solution is
NOTE CONF
unique.
I just want to summarise this.
NOTE CONF
just one more slide that says the last point that
we have out there, and a square matrix is invertible
NOTE CONF
if and only if it is the product of elementary
matrices.
NOTE CONF
So I've got a representation that I can write every
invertible matrices as a product there.
NOTE CONF
And I like to think about this as the Lego
theorem.
NOTE CONF
It tells me indeed that every invertible matrix I can
make up by using elementary matrices as my building blocks.
NOTE CONF
I should add to this that this representation there are.
The product of elementary matrices is not unique.
NOTE CONF
There are several ones of them.
So this really works more like Legos again where you
NOTE CONF
can build something in various different ways.
Um, rather than say prime numbers where the product is
NOTE CONF
unique.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's it for today.
NOTE CONF
I'll see you tomorrow again, where we do something quite
different.
NOTE CONF